---
series: "From Scratch: Computing, Internet and Programming explained to my children"
article: "What is a computer?"
---
# What is a Computer?

A computer is a device that can be used to perform some activities. Specifically, you can use a computer to execute activities thanks to objects that we oldies used to call *programs* and you now call *apps*.

Computers and *apps* work together. A computer provides resources (like computational power, memory, storage, etc.) to several *apps*, and they use them to perform the task they were designed for (for example: play your favourite Pokemon movie). A computer is a useless box without *apps*, and *apps* can exists only inside a computer.

It is important to understand that computers come in different forms and shapes. When your grandparents were young, a computer used to be the size of a big room, full of valves and wires and switches. There were very few of them all over the worlds.

[TODO: find an image of ENIAC or something similar]

Over time, thanks to technological advancements and miniaturization, their size shrinked and their number increased.

A nice and interesting [Timeline of Computer History](http://www.computerhistory.org/timeline/) is available on the website of the [Computer History Museum](http://www.computerhistory.org/).

Today, computers still come in different forms and sizes. For example, *Mainframes* are still the size of a little wardrobe and require some dedicated space to operate. On the opposite side of the spectrum, your *smartphone* is a computer you can keep in your pocket. In the middle, there are computers of all size: *tower* and *middle tower* that you can place under your desk; *desktop* that you can keep over your desk; *laptop* that you can bring with you wherever you go.

[TODO: find images of different types of computers]

But a lot of things around you are effectively computers. Your television is most probably a computer; your Playstation or XBox is definitively a computer; some light bulbs contains little computers inside; your Lego Robot is a computer; your daddy's car has computers all over the place; the thermostat of your house could be a computer. Not everything needs to *appear* as a computer in order to be one: those that are computers without appearing as one are usually called `embedded devices`.

>Here is a task for you: explore your house and try to identify as much computers as you can. Then ask your parents to point it out to you some that you weren't able to discover.

# What are the components of a computer?

No matter its size, all computers are basically made of the same basic components:

1) A `CPU` (Central Processing Unit), is the brain of the computer. It receives instructions from the *apps* and knows how to execute them.
2) A `RAM` (Random Access Memory), is where the CPU stores all the information it needs in order to perform its tasks. The `RAM` is a temporary memory: it is only active during an *app*'s execution. As soon as the execution finish, or when the computer powers down, the content of the `RAM` is discarded.
3) Some `Long Term Storage`, usually in the form of `hard disks`, where *apps* and data are stored in order to be retrieved when they are needed. Usually, information gets loaded from the `hard disk` into the `RAM`, the *app* is executed and the result is saved back to the `hard disk` to be used later.
4) A `GPU` (Graphical Processing Unit) is similar to a `CPU`, but with the very specific task to handle the generation of the images showed to you. All those videogames characters you like to play with? They are generated by a `GPU` following the instructions provided by the videogame you are playing with.
5) Some `I/O` (Input/Output) units, responsible to receive your inputs and provide you with outputs. For example: the keyboard is an input device, as well as the mouse; the monitor in front of you is an output device; the screen of your smartphone is both an input and an output device. Not all the `I/O` units are designed to interface with you, though: some are designed to interface with other `I/O` units.
 6) One or more `Network card`, whose task is to allow your computer to talk with other computers. Once an optional, they are today an integral part of every computer, allowing it to access the `internet`.
